BERKELEY MUNICIPAL CODE

[Obtained from-- http://codepublishing.com/ca/berkeley on June 13,
2015.]

BERKELEY CHARTER

ARTICLE III. ELECTIONS

Section 5. Nomination and Election of Certain Officers.

(12) Use of instant runoff voting in lieu of runoff elections.

For purposes of this charter "instant runoff voting" shall refer to a
voting system which, in a single election, determines the candidate
supported by the voters. Notwithstanding any section of this Charter to
the contrary, upon a determination by the City Council of all of the
following, that: a) the voting equipment and procedures are technically
ready to handle instant runoff voting in municipal elections; b) instant
runoff voting will not preclude the City from consolidating its
municipal elections with the County; and c) instant runoff elections
will not result in additional City election costs, the Council may by
ordinance establish a system of instant runoff voting for the offices of
Mayor, City Council, and Auditor in any manner permitted by the State of
California Elections Code. Once the Council institutes a system of
instant runoff voting, future elections shall be conducted as instant
runoff voting elections, unless the Council finds that circumstances
have changed such that one or more of the prior Council findings
required by this section are no longer valid. In such case, the Council
shall articulate the specific basis therefore in order to suspend an
existing system of instant runoff voting. Subdivision (e) of Section 9
of Article V relating to the percentage threshold to trigger a runoff
election shall have no application to a system of instant runoff voting.
The City Clerk shall conduct voter and community education to
familiarize voters with instant runoff voting.

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION

Chapter 2.14 ELECTIONS – INSTANT RUNOFF VOTING

2.14.010 Definitions.

A. "Ranked choice voting" shall mean an election system in which voters
rank the candidates for office in order of preference, and the ballots
are counted in rounds that, in the case of a single-winner election,
simulate a series of runoffs until one candidate receives a majority of
votes. Also known as "instant runoff voting."

B. "Continuing ballot" shall mean a ballot that counts towards a
continuing candidate.

C. "Continuing candidate" shall mean a candidate that has not been
eliminated.

D. "Majority of votes" shall mean more than fifty percent of the votes
cast on continuing ballots.

E. "Single winner contest" means an election contest in which there is
one seat to be elected for a single office.

F. "Choice" means an indication on a ballot of a voter’s assigned
ranking of candidates (i.e. first choice, second choice, third choice,
etc.) for any single office according to the voter’s preference.

G. "Vote" means a ballot choice that is counted toward the election of a
candidate. During each round of counting, each continuing ballot
contains one vote. All first choices are votes and lower ranked choices
are potential runoff votes that may, in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, be credited to and become votes for a candidate.

H. "Round of counting" or "round" means a step in the counting process
during which votes for all continuing candidates are tabulated for the
purpose of determining whether a candidate has achieved a majority of
the votes cast for a particular office, and, absent a majority, which
candidate or candidates must be eliminated.

I. "Next ranked" means the highest ranked choice for a continuing
candidate.

J. "Exhausted ballot" means any ballot that cannot be advanced because
no further continuing candidates are ranked on that ballot.

K. "Overvote" means any ballot with more than one candidate indicated
for the same ranking.

L. "Undervote" means any ballot that has no candidates indicated at any
ranking.

M. "Skipped ranking" means a ballot contains a higher ranking with no
candidate indicated, and contains a lower ranking with a candidate
indicated.

N. "Voting equipment" means all ballots and/or voting devices, vote
tabulating systems and/or similar or related systems to be used in the
conduct of the City’s election, including but not limited to paper
ballot systems, optical scan systems, and direct recording electronic
systems. (Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.020 General Provisions.

A. Ranked choice voting elections for single-winner city offices shall
be conducted according to the procedures in this chapter, upon the
certification by the California Secretary of State of an automated vote
tabulation system that is able to perform instant runoff voting.

B. Ranked choice voting shall commence with the 2008 General Municipal
Election, provided that if no automated system is certified for use for
the 2008 General Municipal Election, by July 14, 2008, ranked choice
voting will be implemented at the earliest election following
certification, as long as certification occurs no later than the start
of the candidate filing period for that election.

C. The Registrar of Voters must agree to the request for all election
services that allow the City to use ranked choice voting and
consolidation of the election prior to the use of ranked choice voting.
(Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.025 Election Services.

The request for election services submitted to the Registrar of Voters
shall include all requirements and procedures enumerated in sections
2.14.030, 2.14.040, 2.14.050, 2.14.060, 2.14.070, 2.14.080, 2.14.090,
and 2.14.100. (Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.030 Ballot.

A. The ranked choice voting ballot shall allow voters to rank three
choices. The City Council may set a higher number of rankings by
resolution provided that the higher number of rankings is consistent
with the provisions of Charter Section 5 (12).

B. The ballot shall not interfere with a voter’s ability to rank a
write-in candidate.

C. Instructions provided to voters shall conform substantially to the
following specifications, but may be modified based on ballot design and
voting equipment used:

"Vote by ranking candidates in your order of choice. You may rank as
many or as few candidates as you choose. Select a different candidate
for each ranking. Select only one candidate in each ranking. Ranking
more candidates will not hurt your higher ranked candidates. Do not skip
rankings." (Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.040 Tabulation.

The ballots shall be counted in rounds.

A. In the first round, every ballot shall count as a vote towards the
first choice candidate.

B. After any round, if any candidate receives a majority of votes from
the continuing ballots, that candidate shall be declared the winner.

C. If no candidate receives a majority, the candidate receiving the
fewest number of votes shall be eliminated.

D. Every ballot counting towards the eliminated candidate shall be
advanced to the next-ranked continuing candidate. All the continuing
ballots for all continuing candidates shall be counted again in a new
round. (Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.050 Ties.

In the event that two or more candidates tie for the fewest number of
votes, the candidate to eliminate shall be chosen by lot. (Ord. 7038-NS
§ 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.060 Elimination of More Than One Candidate.

During the elimination stage of any round, in the event that any
candidate has more votes than the combined vote total of all candidates
with fewer votes, all the candidates with fewer votes shall be
eliminated simultaneously, and those ballots advanced to the next-ranked
continuing candidate. (Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.070 Skipped Rankings.

In the first or any round, in the event that any ballot reaches a
ranking with no candidate indicated, that ballot shall immediately be
advanced to the next ranking. (Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.080 Undervotes, Overvotes, and Exhausted Ballots.

After each round, any ballot that is not continuing is either an
undervote, overvote, or exhausted ballot. Any ballot that has been
declared an undervote, overvote, or exhausted shall remain so and shall
not count towards any candidate in that round or in subsequent rounds.
(Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.090 Reports.

The following reports shall be produced for public review.

A. The "summary report" for a contest shall mean a report that lists the
candidate vote totals in each round, and the cumulative numbers of
undervotes, overvotes, and exhausted ballots in each round.

B. The "ballot image report" for a contest shall mean a report that
lists, for each ballot, the candidate or candidates indicated at each
ranking, the precinct of the ballot, and whether the ballot was cast by
a vote-by-mail ballot. In the report, the ballots shall be listed in an
order that does not permit the order in which they were cast in each
precinct to be reconstructed.

C. The "comprehensive report" for a contest shall mean a report that
lists the vote totals in the summary report by precinct. The report
shall list, for each round, the number of ballots cast in each precinct
that:

1. were tallied as votes for each candidate in that round,

2. have been declared undervotes,

3. have been declared overvotes, cumulatively for all previous rounds
and inclusive of the reported round of tabulation, and

4. have been declared exhausted cumulatively for all previous rounds and
inclusive of the reported round of tabulation.

D. Mode and manner of release. Preliminary versions of the summary
report and ballot image report shall be made available as soon as
possible after the commencement of the canvass of votes cast. The
summary report, ballot image report, comprehensive report, and
preliminary versions of the summary report and ballot image report shall
be made available to the public during the canvass via the Internet and
by other means. The ballot image report and preliminary versions of the
ballot image report shall be made available in a plain text electronic
format. In any case, preliminary versions of these reports shall be made
available to the public prior to the commencement of the manual tally.
(Ord. 7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)

2.14.100 Manual Tally.

A. A preliminary version of the comprehensive report shall be made
available to the public prior to the selection of precincts for the
public one percent manual tally, as provided by state law.

B. After each round of the manual tally, the second and third choice
votes shall be assigned based of the candidate totals in the summary
round-by-round report for the entire contest. (Ord. 7038-NS § 1,
5/20/08)

2.14.110 Election Procedures if Ranked Choice Voting is Not Used.

In the event that the City is unable to use ranked choice voting, the
City shall hold a general election in November of each even numbered
year and a run-off election, if necessary, in February immediately
following the general election as provided for in the charter. (Ord.
7038-NS § 1, 5/20/08)
