OAKLAND CHARTER

[Obtained from-- https://www.municode.com/library/ca/oakland/codes/code_
of_ordinances?nodeId=16308 on June 13, 2015.]

ARTICLE XI: ELECTIONS

Section 1105. Ranked Choice Voting. Elections for all city offices,
including but not limited to Mayor, Councilmember, City Attorney, City
Auditor, and School Director, shall be conducted using ranked choice
voting, known sometimes as "instant runoff voting."

(a) Definitions. "Ranked choice voting" shall mean an election system in
which voters rank the candidates for office in order of preference, and
the ballots are counted in rounds that, in the case of a single-winner
election, simulate a series of runoffs until one candidate receives a
majority of votes. In each round of counting: (1) "continuing ballot"
shall mean a ballot that counts towards some candidate; (2) "continuing
candidate" shall mean a candidate that has not been eliminated; and (3)
"majority of votes" shall mean more than fifty percent of the votes
coming from continuing ballots.

(b) General Provisions. Ranked choice voting elections for single-winner
city offices shall be conducted according to the procedures in this
section. The City shall conduct a voter education campaign to
familiarize voters with ranked choice voting. The use of ranked choice
voting shall commence with the 2008 General Municipal Election.

(c) Ballot. The ranked choice voting ballot shall allow voters to rank
as many choices as there are candidates. The ballot shall not interfere
with a voter's ability to rank a write-in candidate.

(d) Tabulation. The ballots shall be counted in rounds: (1) in the first
round, every ballot shall count as a vote towards the first choice
candidate. (2) After every round, if any candidate receives a majority
of votes from the continuing ballots, that candidate shall be declared
the winner, If no candidate receives a majority, the candidate receiving
the smallest number of votes shall be eliminated, and every ballot
counting towards that candidate shall be advanced to the next-ranked
continuing candidate. All the ballots shall be counted again in a new
round.

(e) Ties. In the event that two or more candidates tie for the smallest
number of votes, the candidate to eliminate shall be chosen by lot.

(f) Elimination of more than one candidate. During the elimination stage
of any round, in the event that any candidate has more votes than the
combined vote total of all candidates with fewer votes. all the
candidates with fewer votes shall be eliminated simultaneously, and
those ballots advanced to the next ranked continuing candidate.

(g) Skipped rankings. In the first or any round, in the event that any
ballot reaches a ranking with no candidate indicated, that ballot shall
immediately be advanced to the next ranking.

(h) Undervotes, Overvotes, and Exhausted Ballots. After each round, any
ballot that is not continuing is an undervote, overvote, or exhausted
ballot, as follows: Any ballot that has no candidates indicated at any
ranking shall be declared an "undervote." In the event that any ballot
reaches a ranking with more than one candidate indicated, that ballot
shall immediately be declared an "overvote." In the event that any
ballot cannot be advanced because no further candidates are ranked on
that ballot, that ballot shall immediately be declared "exhausted" Any
ballot that has been declared an undervote, overvote. or exhausted shall
remain so and shall not count towards any candidate in that round or in
subsequent rounds.

(i) Reports. Summary, ballot image, and comprehensive reports shall be
made available after each ranked choice voting election, as follows: (1)
The "summary report" for a race shall mean a report that lists the
candidate vote totals in each round, along with the cumulative numbers
of undervotes, overvotes, and exhausted ballots in each round. (2) The
"ballot image report" for a race shall mean a report that lists, for
each ballot, the candidate or candidates indicated at each ranking, the
precinct of the ballot, and whether the ballot was cast absentee. In the
report, the ballots shall be listed in an order that does not permit the
order in which they were cast in each precinct to be reconstructed. (3)
The "comprehensive report" for a race shall mean a report that breaks
the numbers in the summary report down by precinct. The report shall
list for each round the number of ballots cast in each precinct (a) that
count as votes for each candidate in that round, (b) that have been
declared undervotes, (c) that have been declared overvotes up to that
point, and (d) that have been declared exhausted up to that point. (4)
Mode and manner of release. Preliminary versions of the summary report
and ballot image report shall be made available as soon as possible
after the ballots have begun to be processed and counted. The summary
report, ballot image report, comprehensive report, and preliminary
versions of the summary report and ballot image report shall be made
available to the public during the canvass via the internet and by other
means. The ballot image report and preliminary versions of the ballot
image report shall be made available in a plain text electronic format.

(j) Manual Tally. Prior to the selection of precincts for the public one
percent manual tally, as provided by State law, a report shall be made
available to the public that lists, for the ballots subject to the
manual tally, the number of those ballots in each precinct that counted
in each round as undervotes, overvotes, exhausted ballots, and as votes
for each candidate. The public manual tally shall check those vote
totals in each of the randomly selected precincts.

(k) Changes to Procedures. For the purposes of this subsection: "voting
equipment" shall mean all ballots and/or voting devices, vote tabulating
systems and/or similar or related systems to be used in the conduct of
the City's election, including but not limited to paper ballot systems,
optical scan systems, and touchscreen systems.

(1) Number of rankings. In the event that the voting equipment cannot
feasibly accommodate a number of rankings on the ballot equal to the
number of candidates, the City Clerk may limit the number of choices a
voter may rank to the maximum number allowed by the equipment. This
limit shall never he less than three.

(2) Voting Equipment. If the voting equipment cannot feasibly
accommodate all of the procedures in subsections (e)-(j) above, the City
Clerk may make changes to those procedures provided that ranked choice
voting shall still be used and the smallest feasible number of changes
made until such time as the voting equipment can accommodate those
procedures in their entirety.

(3) State Guidelines. If the State of California adopts guidelines for
the conduct of ranked choice voting elections and the voting equipment
used to conduct the City's election can accommodate the State's
guidelines, the City Clerk shall have the option of adopting those
guidelines, in whole or in part, in lieu of the ranked choice voting
procedures in this section.

(4) First Choice Tally. The City Clerk may authorize the following
change to make ranked choice voting on voting equipment feasible: before
counting the ballots in rounds, the first ranking on every ballot shall
be tallied, with the exception of overvotes. If some candidate receives
a majority of first rankings from all ballots cast, including undervotes
and excluding overvotes, that candidate shall be declared the winner;
and the ballots shall not he counted in rounds. Otherwise, the ballots
shall be counted in rounds in accordance with this section.

(5) Election integrity. The City Clerk shall further have the authority
to make any changes to these procedures necessary to preserve the
secrecy of the ballot and ensure the integrity and smooth functioning of
the election, provided that ranked choice voting shall still be used and
the smallest number of changes made to achieve such purpose.

(l) Exception from Using Ranked Choice Voting. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Charter, the City shall use ranked choice voting once
the Alameda County Registrar of Voters is able to conduct the election
on behalf of the City in accordance with the requirements and procedures
of this section, including any changes to such procedures made pursuant
to subsection (k).

(m) Election Procedures if Ranked Choice Voting is Not Used:

(1) In the event that the City is unable to use ranked choice voting,
the City shall hold Municipal Nominating Elections for the nomination of
officers and for such other purposes as the Council may prescribe, which
shall be held in the City on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
June in each even numbered year. In order to consolidate Municipal
Nominating Elections with Statewide Primary Elections, the Council may
by ordinance provide for a date for a Municipal Nominating Election
which conforms to the date of a Statewide Primary Election. Any
candidate receiving a majority of the vote cast for all candidates for
that office at the Municipal Nominating Election shall be declared
elected.

(2) If at any Municipal Nominating Election there is any office to which
no person was elected, then the two candidates for such office receiving
the highest number of votes for such office shall be the candidates, and
the only candidates, for such office whose names shall be printed upon
ballots to be issued at the second or General Municipal Election;
provided that, in any event, all persons receiving a number of votes
equal to the highest number of votes received by any candidate shall
also be candidates at such second election. The candidate receiving the
highest number of votes cast for all candidates for that office at the
second or General Municipal Election shall be declared elected.
