SAN FRANCISCO CHARTER

[Obtained from-- http://www.amlegal.com/library/ca/sfrancisco.shtml on
June 13, 2015.]

ARTICLE XIII: ELECTIONS

SEC. 13.102. INSTANT RUNOFF ELECTIONS.

(a) For the purposes of this section: (1) a candidate shall be deemed
"continuing" if the candidate has not been eliminated; (2) a ballot
shall be deemed "continuing" if it is not exhausted; and (3) a ballot
shall be deemed "exhausted," and not counted in further stages of the
tabulation, if all of the choices have been eliminated or there are no
more choices indicated on the ballot. If a ranked-choice ballot gives
equal rank to two or more candidates, the ballot shall be declared
exhausted when such multiple rankings are reached. If a voter casts a
ranked-choice ballot but skips a rank, the voter's vote shall be
transferred to that voter's next ranked choice.

(b) The Mayor, Sheriff, District Attorney, City Attorney, Treasurer,
Assessor-Recorder, Public Defender, and members of the Board of
Supervisors shall be elected using a ranked-choice, or "instant runoff,"
ballot. The ballot shall allow voters to rank a number of choices in
order of preference equal to the total number of candidates for each
office; provided, however, if the voting system, vote tabulation system
or similar or related equipment used by the City and County cannot
feasibly accommodate choices equal to the total number of candidates
running for each office, then the Director of Elections may limit the
number of choices a voter may rank to no fewer than three. The ballot
shall in no way interfere with a voter's ability to cast a vote for a
write-in candidate.

(c) If a candidate receives a majority of the first choices, that
candidate shall be declared elected. If no candidate receives a
majority, the candidate who received the fewest first choices shall be
eliminated and each vote cast for that candidate shall be transferred to
the next ranked candidate on that voter's ballot. If, after this
transfer of votes, any candidate has a majority of the votes from the
continuing ballots, that candidate shall be declared elected.

(d) If no candidate receives a majority of votes from the continuing
ballots after a candidate has been eliminated and his or her votes have
been transferred to the next-ranked candidate, the continuing candidate
with the fewest votes from the continuing ballots shall be eliminated.
All votes cast for that candidate shall be transferred to the next-
ranked continuing candidate on each voter's ballot. This process of
eliminating candidates and transferring their votes to the next-ranked
continuing candidates shall be repeated until a candidate receives a
majority of the votes from the continuing ballots.

(e) If the total number of votes of the two or more candidates credited
with the lowest number of votes is less than the number of votes
credited to the candidate with the next highest number of votes, those
candidates with the lowest number of votes shall be eliminated
simultaneously and their votes transferred to the next-ranked continuing
candidate on each ballot in a single counting operation.

(f) A tie between two or more candidates shall be resolved in accordance
with State law.

(g) The Department of Elections shall conduct a voter education campaign
to familiarize voters with the ranked-choice or, "instant runoff,"
method of voting.

(h) Any voting system, vote tabulation system, or similar or related
equipment acquired by the City and County shall have the capability to
accommodate this system of ranked-choice, or "instant runoff,"
balloting.

(i) Ranked choice, or "instant runoff," balloting shall be used for the
general municipal election in November 2002 and all subsequent
elections. If the Director of Elections certifies to the Board of
Supervisors and the Mayor no later than July 1, 2002 that the Department
will not be ready to implement ranked-choice balloting in November 2002,
then the City shall begin using ranked-choice, or "instant runoff,"
balloting at the November 2003 general municipal election.

If ranked-choice, or "instant runoff," balloting is not used in November
of 2002, and no candidate for any elective office of the City and
County, except the Board of Education and the Governing Board of the
Community College District, receives a majority of the votes cast at an
election for such office, the two candidates receiving the most votes
shall qualify to have their names placed on the ballot for a runoff
election held on the second Tuesday in December of 2002.
